the decision to throw something out.
The judgment to throw something out is a cultural statement itself where I, as a librarian or supervisor of a collection, say I know enough about Western or world or Eastern culture to say that civilization does not need to preserve this artifact.
That is an awesome judgment, especially when you take one or two of these things
And you say, this is what I found by accident going through pile after pile after pile of stuff.
But if I wanted to find this particular song, one of these, could I ever find it in every bookshop?
There are books with low prices.
But if you went looking for them, you would look perhaps a lifetime to find them.
And never find it.
Never find it.
Let me take you to the next step after we went through Ezra Cornell's letterbooks.
And just before you go to Ezra Cornell, I go back to Ignacio Sanchez.
Ignacio Sanchez is the black composer from the 18th century.
Now we're going to hear a lot about Ignacio Sanchez.
I think so far, right.
I think he survives in two or three copies that I can track.
How did you find his biography?
Well, he's mentioned in lists of black musicians, but nobody's paid too much attention to him.
He's never been recorded.
Nobody's done very much.
examined his music in any way you really want me to tell me i've got it xeroxed at home but i couldn't find it the other day so i don't know what it's like i haven't looked in a while i went to the library of congress and copied it yeah yeah it's dance tunes and what you might say is from what i remember there's nothing really amazing about it
But that's another way of saying he was this African-based composer in the mainstream of European music.
Who did something.
And on the other hand... On the other hand, the Chevalier Saint-Georges, who might be thrown out by some provincial librarian because the librarian never heard of him, and that's the judge of preserving culture,
On the other hand, the Chevalier Saint-Georges rather strikes me as what Napoleon would sound like had he played the violin.
Absolutely amazing.
Just bombastic all over the place.
Really wonderful stuff.
John Wesley Powell was one of our professors at Illinois Wesley in 1865 to 67.
He produced an Atlas of the Grand Canyon.
It's going in a shocking direction.
And there's a companion volume to it.
I'm not sure whether we have it or not.
I haven't checked.
I should have given the story.
Illinois Wesleyan, yeah.
Because we have some Powell pottery that he brought back from his Indian expositions.
We've worked with some of his books, but we didn't have more.
Whether we have this one or not, I don't know.
I was talking to a book dealer the other day, and he told me about a Powell item he had just acquired.
He got the Atlas and the companion volume.
I said, wow, wow, wow, wow, wow.
How much was that?
How much is it?
He said, well, it's about $2,000.
That's extraordinary.
That's a letter.
Extraordinary, yeah.
And then he said at the same place he got the Atlas,
He also got another six-volume set.
I haven't a clue what it is.
I think except it's something Scandinavian.
Six volumes that has an auction record of something like $6,500.
And then he told me what the sale was.
that this was a sale at a college library where the librarian had determined that they really didn't need 19th century atlases because those had been superseded, so they were being sold for one dollar a volume until noon when it was a dollar a bag.
But the dealer, bless him, had the wits to think that if he waited until noon, they might be gone, so he wasted his money and paid a dollar a piece.
and was about to 1,000 times his investment in each book.
This is the kind of librarian who is a menace in the academic community.
So I called the president of the place, concerned, and said, do you know this is going on?
And he didn't know anything about it.
He wanted to talk to the dealer, and he was not pleased.
The president was.
He was not pleased.
I mean, from a fiscal point of view, if you want to deaccession something worth $2,000, please do try to get $1,500, not two bucks.
Last year, my wife... I was going to tell you another thing I have.
It was the art museum deaccession, though.
That's the story.
Yeah, well... Can you believe this?
Well, are you happy or glad?
That's, you know, as a collector, you have to ask yourself a question.
Don't give a thing to a museum or to a library.
Well, that's a real question right there.
It used to be that the public regarded the museum as a point of preservation.
And when the world finds out,
that Cornell does what it does, that the Worcester Museum does what it does, it may be less either.
Well, I may not report the Worcester Museum.
Well, well.
What can Art Museum, what do they know about?
Well, you know, life is full of that.
I got from one source, somewhat similar, a box, a nice little blue box, like that.
And there are a few pencils in it, and it says on the top, J. Thoreau pencils, Thoreau and Company pencils.
Exactly.
When I saw this, I said... So, there are a bunch of pencils, only one of which, but one of which is...
And Henry Petrovsky of Duke has written a book on the pencil, and there's a whole chapter in there.
And I've got this box, and I bought it on a suspicion that that's what it was.
And that's why Thoreau goes in my multi-talented book, because
He's writing all these things, but he's also the guy who puts number two and three and one on all our pencils that we use every day, just to make a little money.
But this is something that a place got rid of that they didn't want.
I'm not going to tell you where it was.
You'd be totally outraged.
Well, you can tell me.
It was Yale.
It doesn't bother me at all.
Bill Reese has told me about the things that go on over at Yale.
You know the Colonel House papers?
No.
Well, House was Wilson's chief of staff during World War I and published the two volumes called Papers of Colonel House, which was kind of the inner workings of the peace process in the Wilson White House.
Yale has the
house papers, and these were put up for bids, and I got them.
I have the house envelopes.
They sold the envelopes, so I have a bunch of envelopes addressed by Woodrow Wilson.
I can show you nine examples of Woodrow Wilson, the President of the United States, forwarding mail.
Can you remind of Francis Henry Fayer?
Sure.
He's the head of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Anyway, please don't put all this in there.
One day, Rowan says to me, I got some college stuff that you might be interested in.
Well, we lived in New London, so I went back and forth.
It was an hour and a quarter up there all the time.
We were up there once every two weeks or so.
So he said, I've got some college stuff coming in.
You might be interested in college.
You'll hear.
He said, it's a collection of college catalogs after 1876.
That he particularly bid on the
student publications where the likes of Frederick Remington and other, I think mostly Yale kids, who later turned out to be famous artists, were publishing as students.
And so that's what he wanted.
And the rest of the stuff was going to the dump.
I couldn't.
Rowling was going to send it to the dump.
Now, you better not put this in.
We'll be here in the town.
I said, well, gee, that's interesting.
Let me come right up and look at some of this.
Oh, Jesus.
Great.
Here's a box of 1870s, 1880s, Harvard-class books, Yale-class books,
little tiny black college catalogs from the South, frontier colleges from Arkansas and Oklahoma and Montana.
Roland said, you can have any of this you want.
Some of it I've already trashed, but any of it you want, you can have.
I said, if you don't mind, I'll take the whole thing.
Now, what I had bid off was 11,000 credits.
How much?
He gave it to me.
I mean, the man is amazing.
From 1876 on.
So that I found myself, and luckily Connecticut College had an empty library building that hadn't been developed at that point.
So I found myself a proud possessor.
of a near-completeness of Harvard class books, you know, the year they graduate, three years, not five years, ten years.
I'll tell you in a minute.
And Treasurer's reports, catalogs of zillions of colleges all over the country.
I held personally the equal of
the collection in the stocks at Yale for Brown.
Right down in Selkridge.
Right under my nose, that's where he was, the Selkridge.
American antiquarian.
They decided they couldn't keep anything after 1876, so they sold it to Batwell, and he gave me what he didn't buy.
I was just elected AAS last year.
Well, don't tell us to.
No, I don't.
So anyway, so, you know, there comes a limit in life.
I gave it to Hobart.
That's why the first BD you got said it was at Hobart.
But I called Hobart.
We're building, we're expanding our library.
We're going to go from 200 to 400,000 volumes.
We hope we're going to get a whole new building.
That's the hope.
And believe it or not, we are still digressing on the subject of the man to whom the book is to be sent.
We're still on the opening question, Plato.
And so I called the librarian.
I mean, the only thing better than one librarian
who didn't do it right is two.
I called the librarian at Hobart.
I said, Bill, I used to be provost there.
I said, you know that stuff I gave you?
It's taken up half your basement.
Well, are you doing anything with it?
No.
You want it?
You can have it.
Really?
Yeah, just pay us the shipping, OK?
Jeez.
So I was given this present, in a sense, twice, and it now belongs to Illinois Wesley, where I'm in a position to protect it.
How do you see its value at your school?
Well, let's put it this way.
If you're a student in sociology and you want to study American elites or something like that, is there such a thing?
Now, I want to put down my club membership, not my...
AT&T calling card number.
I have to concentrate on this for a minute here.
Here's an example.
The Harvard class books, and there may be a shelf this long.
The class of 1883 alone, and then another size chunk for 1884, the same for 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, amounts to a series of brag books.
Of what books?
Bragg books.
Bragg.
Yeah.
I mean, this is what I own.
This is who I am.
This is what I do.
It's an early Who's School thing that somebody writes about.
But for a whole college class.
You see who these boys are, where they come.
I tell you where they prepared, what school they went to.
Exactly.
So for sociology students, the ability to follow a single Harvard class
through 40 years of adult life is a magnificent godsend for a senior thesis.
You could maybe do a nice little monograph.
Of course you could.
And you could do one after another, after another, after another.
So where's the perception of these people?
Have they become too jaded to...?
It's hard to know.
I mean, there are those who are protectors of the heritage and those who think their goal in life
is to have a library with lots of extra space on clean shelves.
You know, you're telling me things that are very, that are within this, that I'm looking at.
Now, let's, should we finish with William Horn?
Oh, yeah.
He's just, just say, William H. Horn.
It's not like Lena, there's no E there, right?
Book collector and son of a book collector.
Well, I'm not sure, H-O-R-N, no E, right.
He's got a middle initial, but I'm not sure what it is.
His father is a book collector, and he is a book collector.
You don't want me to be too specific about... Please give us a grant.
No, no, I mean Americana and stuff like that.
Yeah.
Well, he had a lot of Americana.
And bird stuff.
He also has a Trotsky autograph.
He's got a History of the Russian Revolution, that modern library thing, signed by Trotsky.
He showed me in his office.
He may not like it, but I don't know much about it.
Well, all right.
All right.
I'll take care of it.
I won't be home until Sunday.
Oh, well, thank you, thank you, thank you.
But I'm not so mad that I couldn't find a bookshop.
I'll send you one of the seconds.
The fifths have a change, which I'm not too happy about.
Okay, the rare second edition as opposed to the fifth.
Well, the obtainable part.
I wonder which one I have.
I'll have to go on and see.
The first does have to have a one in it.
I personally like the letters because they have very quiet little collections.
So, turn off your machine.
There are three ways.
Three ways I found it.
I'm writing a book on multi-talented people.
And here is a book on book collecting with the absolutely right title.
You know, these people are slightly nuts or more.
So how did you find it?
I think we saw a review of it.
My wife said, this is absolutely for you.
And so we went right out and got it.
I think it was a Christmas present or maybe one of those that came in the house before, you know, was consumed before Christmas.
But...
Here was this amazing man who had a PhD in psychology, but ran a restaurant and wrote cookbooks.
I loved it.
It's right in my multi-talented thing.
Well, yeah.
And then to find that he gave 100 books here, as he said, you've probably heard this a million times, he gives...
100,000 books to Iowa, and 100,000 items, and I say, okay, Louis, that's enough.
We really don't need any more.
Thank you, thank you.
22,000.
And he says, I think to myself, half a Japanese mushroom, and I don't mean Itake, the other.
And...
And so he gives 200,000 of Johnson and Wales.
Well, it's not books, it's things.
Well, things.
Books and collectibles.
Books and things.
It was a presidential collection when they were just there.
And so Sada still has all the rest of that.
The best books could go to Iowa.
The magnificent books.
But they're most appreciative.
So he's an amazing man.
So anyway, that's how...
That's how I found him.
Then I went in the Abraham Lincoln bookshop and started babbling, and where she said, well, you ought to meet Louie Zathmary.
In fact, I think I asked him about Zathmary.
And he said, oh, yes, he's a wonderful man.
And then I heard about him from Jim Donnelly of R.R.
Donnelly, who knew him, too, and said, oh, my friend Louie, you ought to know about him.
So finally, I just called him up out of the blue.
What do we got here?
R.I.P.
There's one thing about collecting.
I think, that leads you to organize and see categories, to see a sequence, to see things in a clump, in a group, the way libraries do, the way old librarians used to do.
I wouldn't say the way modern librarians do, but the way libraries as a whole used to.
That is, these 85 volumes are the collection on early children's books
These 75 are the basic titles on book collectors and the like.
Well, it came to the annual report for us this year.
We had been active in several projects working with high school kids.
We got involved with one in Detroit that pairs up ninth graders and colleges and essentially says to inner city kids,
If you keep your nose clean, get a B average, 95% attendance, and 21 minimum on the ACT, you are into our college as a ninth grader.
Are we a state-supported school member?
No, we're private.
With funding, by the time you get to college freshmen.
So you know as a high school freshman you're ready to go to college for inner city kids.
This is run by the guidance office in Detroit.
There are 11, I think it is, public schools in Detroit that are part of this.
We took a look at it once we found out about it.
And we said, is there a reason in the world, here we are sitting in a private school in Illinois,
We don't care that there are no other private schools involved.
Why don't we do that too?
They're not coming to your university for a degree.
Well, they will be coming, though.
This is Princeton's problem.
Princeton says, what's the scope to it?
They will be coming, because we agreed that we'll take them.
So we've got three or four kids each year who are assigned to us and we work with, and they come visit.
So then, having done that, we said to the colleges in Illinois,
There are 24 or so private colleges in Illinois, and they said, if this is what some people are doing in Detroit, is there any logical reason we don't do something like this for Chicago?
So it was basically my push, but I don't stress that too much.
Last February, on our campus, we announced that we were going to do this with the city of Chicago, and we had 30 kids at our place this summer to get started.
You got a press release on them or something?
Oh, yeah.
Send it to me.
I'll send you a bunch of stuff about these things.
Wait till you hear what's coming.
So this is the old collector mentality.
I mean, it just bites hard in everything I do.
It's time to do our annual report.
and we're one of the national liberal arts colleges.
And usually a college annual report is a celebration of how wonderful you are and the most glorious adjectives you can summon up.
So I particularly wanted to stress these programs we're doing with kids.
What if I would have sent him just a letter with some of this?
Oh, I'd love that.
I'd love that.
But now, now hear this out.
So I said, you're going to like this.
So as the old collector says,
You know, we're doing our thing, and we're going to say it's great and world-shattering, but I know Occidental is doing stuff in L.A., and I'll bet every other liberal arts college is, too.
So guess what?
we wrote collector style to all 161 places on the national liberal arts college list and said our annual report this year is going to be a report on what the selected liberal arts colleges are doing with local corporations and local schools today to improve the quality of life in our communities without waiting for some stupid federal grant or study for a committee uh and um
It's coming out on the 25th of October.
Five days from now.
With this annual report, and I said to myself, you know, each one of these stories sounds basically prosaic.
You know, college does good, rah-rah.
But I've never seen it all collected together.
So we shipped it down to Mel Elfin, who's the editor of the U.S.
News College issue, whom we know a little bit.
I've been to see him.
And I said, Mel, will you give me a read?
Is this news or dull?
And he wrote back, or he called back, and he said, this is really interesting stuff.
We sent him a draft, you know, early zero.
He said, this is really interesting stuff.
Be sure to send me some more.
Well, he called this morning, kind of, where the hell is it?
And I said, it's going to be out in five days.
And he said, well, I really want some, because I've got a plan to use it.
Not for news, but some kind of project he wants to do there at the magazine for recognizing schools that are doing things with their communities.
So it sounds as though he's real interested in this kind of stuff.
You mentioned that your school was a private liberal arts school.
I'll send you a bunch of stuff about it.
So how about your attitude about books?
Let's put it this way.
In designing a library, God, don't get this in there, but, you know, it's just true.
I have made the point again and again and again with the staff and with the faculty.
I came, they had a library of about 150,000 or up to 200 or so now, I think, plus or minus.
And we had a library consultant who come in, who come in, thinks he's a big gun in the library world, and a lot of people do too, and said a place like this doesn't need more than 120,000 good books with a real, you know, adjectival emphasis on good.
That's actually what he said.
Thank you.
So I said, well, that's a very interesting observation.
Let me ask you, based on that, two questions.
would you, sir, like to teach at a place that had 120,000 good books?
He said, well, of course not.
I said, well, why do you think of any of our faculty what?
And then I said, it's all very well to say we should have 120,000 good books.
Riddle me, sir, please, what is a bad book we should not have?
If we have too many, how do we get rid of them all?
Well, this, he thought, was
He's a very senior library professor, and this was like an uppity freshman asking a smart-alecky question.
And I all went through him out of the office, made him rewrite his report, and frankly, I thought, bordered on the illiterate.
But this is the kind of genius that's floating around in the library world that is minimizing
what students will have under their fingertips to find.
I mean, we find things on search machines on the computers with ease, and it's interesting and it's exciting.
But there's also the element of serendipity in the library.
If you pull down a book simply because of the binding or the color of the spine or importance, then you find something very interesting.
I got an article in William & Mary Quarterly once simply because I pulled down a binding in Sterling Yale.
I had been working on college graduations.
And they always had, in the pre-revolutionary period, they always had a lot of Latin theses to be debated and questions to be answered, usually in Latin.
And sometimes, word for word, the same questions on different campuses.
So I wondered, how did this happen?
They must, you know, plagiarism is at least 200 years old.
One day in Yale, for no good reason at all, I'm just walking down a shelf, but I see a spine.
And I pull it down.
You know, it's like this magical thing that Glow-Owned Law has had.
And all of a sudden, I find myself holding a question book for academic exercises from the 18th century by a fellow of one of the English colleges, I think.
which was, word for word, the source of commencement debates at Harvard and Yale at Princeton.
Four months later, it was an article in William & Herd Quarterly.
The guy's name was Thomas Johnson.
He was a classicist, I think, at Oxford.
And I thought, this is interesting.
I had no idea this book existed.
I found it in a collection of three million by absolute accident, just pulling it off the shelf at Yale.
If I'd gone looking in the card catalog, how would it have looked?
Yale at that point had a card catalog.
And I wouldn't have found it because the card for this book was not a three by five.
It was a one by five.
They used to have a different form.
And it was a thin, thin, thin little card done in the 1870s by hand.
It wasn't even typed.
And it adhered to the card of the previous author so that anybody flipping through would never see it.
I tell a story in my talks.
The big question is, what is a culture?
And if you ask that in another era in China, there will be no doubt that it is the accumulated wisdom and literary record and historical record of that culture.
And thus, if you really want to know, I'll look it up.
The Chinese come up with some great encyclopedia
for a collection of 1,200 volumes or something, a nominal collection, of published stuff, I don't know, in the 1300s or 1400s, I mean, it's an antique itself now, but this was a compilation of virtual, all-known documents, so that the culture used to be essentially identified
as its library.
But the interesting thing about archives and about the broader space collections is, if you think only for today, you think of the collections in a very practical way that students, you think, are going to ask tomorrow morning.
If you think of the Athenaeum, we bought it for use there, you are thinking of the potential questions that will come up in the next two centuries.
A culture with a sense of itself and the kind of cultural resources that China and Japan and England have had have been willing to plan for two or three or four centuries.
If a staircase is six centuries old at Oxford, it is not classified as out of date.
It is simply venerable and respected accordingly.
though it possibly wouldn't pass OSHA standards in this country.
The point is that we may venerate now and seek eagerly, as many historians do, anything about black poets or black musicians in the 18th century or even 19th century.
But if somebody in 1910
threw it out as kind of trivial trash, that no one will ever be interested in this, we can't find it.
And all too often, we find we have one of the two or three known copies.
An interesting thing, even as a collector myself, is to go to the National Union catalog or some database via the electronic accredited
And you ask, how many other copies of this are there?
Now, you have to assume there's a certain factor floating around in private hands in addition to what's in the public of known collections.
But when you find you have something that's only in two other libraries in the country, or perhaps no library in the United States, or you have a British piece that's nowhere in this country.
And you have things in your possession?
I have one that I think may be the only known copy.
What's that?
Well, it's religious poems or meditations of an English author that was reprinted many times in America.
But it's an interesting story that I got this, I think, in a group that Boutwell got from the American Antiquarian Society of, you know, dated books that they had duplicates to.
Well, I don't know why I looked this one up.
Uh, but the, uh, at Aquarian was the only one to have a copy of this.
And guess what?
The copy I bought has all the same fly marks and ink blots as the one that's on the microcard.
So I've got the one that's on the microcard, and whether they still, I mean, it's not something, any luck.
When did the chapter just call it?
Yeah, this is probably in the latter years of Marcus McCorrison, right?
1980, 1982, or something like that.
No, that sounds actually better back in argument.
Yeah.
Very arrogant then, Marcus.
Arrogance, you see.
It's arrogance, isn't it?
Well, if it's arrogance in defense of the culture, then it's something that should be encouraged.
But when it is somebody who says, I stand in judgment of a culture as a librarian and saying this we will have, this we won't.
And you don't think that's intellectual fascism?
Well, in a sense it is.
In every way we have to do it.
That is, if I know I can order a hundred books this year.
um there's a bit of the same thing in adding books that is what do i choose to add out of the thousands of things i could pick which hundred are worthy of being known by the students because i chose them um you try to not personalize it so much but when you're deaccessioning things you have to realize you do it for centuries not just for this week's show okay well have you doing session things that you're i try not to i've died
Do you have the final word?
If I find out about it, probably, because I'm, you know, at the far end of the administrative chain.
Do they know your attitude?
They certainly do.
And I think I have worked with the faculty to get the faculty to say, please share my attitude toward this
a library consultant we have, we want a library that's serious, and that means 400,000 on-the-shelf volumes at minimum for the students and for us to use.
Now, there are some librarians, I've known in a couple of contexts, who say faculty already have PhDs, they don't need books.
Believe it or not, I've heard that about professional librarians a long time ago.
I've also heard it said, well, if the book doesn't circulate in five years, then we shouldn't have it.
We should or we shouldn't.
Should not.
Unless that shows it's useless.
Since I just thought it up, it may go nowhere.
There's a great concern with genetic diversity.
There are many major seed companies like... What's the word seed?
Seed, as in, you know, plant a bean.
Okay, yeah.
You're a very good interviewer for your tape recorder, I've noticed, by the way.
Spell the word.
What word was this?
Okay, I mean, you learn.
It could be seed.
I could spend 20 minutes trying to figure that word out.
Burpee sells seeds.
It sells seeds to kids who want to, kids, little old ladies, lawyers who want to grow the best and quickest and easiest, the largest and most tasty cucumbers.
They don't want to screw around with some exotic rare thing.
They just want the easiest cucumber they can grow.
So every year they may offer 10 or 15 cucumber varieties.
And if you look back at seed catalogs of the sort I've got listed there, you'll see that almost none of those offered in 1910 or 20 or 1890 are available today.
Well, if you want an 1860s-type tomato, and it's genetic material, so it's got to keep growing and growing and growing, or it just withers and dies, where are you going to get one?
There is a genetics bank, I think, in Colorado for seed types.
There's another one in Geneva, New York.
But the big trade is out of Seed Savers Exchange, a group in Decorah, Iowa, which has...
a network of about 11,000 people, I think it is, who subscribe to this.
And if you want beans or corn or any kind of vegetable at all, you could write to one of these people directly, say somebody in Ontario or Florida or Oregon, and they will send you a packet of seeds of this exotic strain
that you can't get at all in the commercial market.
Some of them you can, but most of them you can't.
And in a weird way, I almost sense libraries going much the same, that where there are thousands and thousands and thousands of things published each year,
The mandate of a state university is to serve the needs of those right in front.
I know we're not talking about Cornell.
Right.
But if you say, well, Mr. Bazbaines, you come and see us once every 84 years, that's a bit of a luxury.
We just can't afford to do that.
Well, I resent that.
Yeah, I do, too.
Thank God it was there.
Because it wouldn't be in my book if it wasn't.
Many private collectors
And things like the Athenaeum are like the Seed Savers Exchange.
They are preserving intact what Burpee is no longer sending out in the seed packets because they've got something else they've got to sell to the kind of market they serve.
And I never thought of the collector as a kind of bibliographic resource and preservationist resource to the nation.
But I think the more people read what you write, what other people write, and they hear these horror tales,
about people who give great collections to major institutions thinking they will be forever preserved.
They're just going to think twice about that.
Do you know Cornell at all?
Well, I was provost at Hobart for five years, so... Say that, cultural literacy, the role of a library, the role of a...
a university, a public library, and frankly, a private book collector as a cultural force.
I'd never thought about that way.
No.
The Japanese noble, the samurai, the noble families of Japan would have libraries.
They would see themselves as preservers of culture for themselves.
You go to the great country houses in England,
And here are these huge, noble, wonderful libraries that go on and on and on for yards and yards and yards, as though they all saw themselves to a degree as a mini version of the British Museum or their own college.
Again, you go back to Addison.
in his essay on coins and medals in the early 18th century, when he simply says, this is what a gentleman should have in a well-appointed library.
In the hands of some people who are in your book, here are people who are preserving a little fragment or a very pointed fragment of culture
It may be African-Americans in the South.
It may be Czechs in Chicago.
With Louis Zatmeri, there was Hungarian-American relations.
I mean, he himself preserved a chunk of that story that any institution would be lucky to have.
Well, and they're all thrilled to have it, too.
But he collected it.
They didn't.
But you know what bothers them?
What if 50 years from now, nobody's interested in those books?
That's where the private collector reemerges, to keep picking up the pieces, as long as they're allowed to be in the circuit.
And there was a teacher there who says, oh, I don't care if you teach this.
So nobody touches this stuff.
So some hotshot says, well, let's get rid of it.
We could use the space.
and they sell it, or they give it to Roland Balbo, who even sends it to the dump, or gives it to somebody.
Or if I get it, then the process continues.
That's a happy consequence.
But that's not the way it's supposed to work, I don't think.
I don't know.
People think that they give something to an institution that is going to be forever preserved.
They're making a leap of faith
Well, the whole question of what it means to be in a library is quite interesting.
Those who think, well, every book has to be in super condition.
It has to have a fancy binding on it.
No, of course not.
But that's really not a productive one, is it?
Librarians, it's as though they go to national conventions and they lose points big time.
If there are any books that have flaky spines or broken bindings,
So tell me about all of your books, all of these things you told me about tonight.
Is it a synergistic kind of a collection?
Do they all come together and produce something that is greater than the sum of its parts?
Well, they do for me.
And I know about all these diverse little things.
People sometimes say, how do you know about that?
How do you know about that?
And my answer is, oh, I have a book about it.
You know, it sits on this shelf or it sits on that shelf.
And if you just look at a lot of the things you have, pay even minimal attention to them.
You learn wondrous things.
But do they all reinforce each other?
Not a bit.
In my own mind, the cookery goes vaguely with the music, but that's not a connection most people would make apart from the time.
Well, you used the word vaguely.
Do you have any vague thoughts of what this collection is and what happens to it?
I mean, what's going to happen after I'm done with it?
I haven't a clue.
I haven't even thought about that.
talking with you and get very depressed.
You know, what I have to hope is that a child or grandchild might be interested in it.
That doesn't always happen.
Somebody has some use for it.
I mean, you know, you rescued so many of these things on the way to the dump.
There's a completely different philosophy.
And it was shared by... It seems to say that when you're telling them, they will once again be found for the dump.
Well, unless they're parceled out through dealers or auctions.
to those similar to me who want them i have a friend who had a very impressive collection of medals and decorations and he's he's very much in health lives in new york city but he sold a lot of it at one point and his attitude was it's not going to an institution very well could have gone to american numismatic society or the smithsonian a lot of it but
that he'd had a lot of fun with it, and he wanted other collectors to have fun with it.
He wrote a bunch of books based on it, too.
Why are people so quick to send things off to the dump, to the landfill?
To the dump?
To the dump, to the landfill, to the, you know, wherever things go.
Well, they don't know what they are, and don't care, and don't realize how interesting what they have could be to someone else.
I'll give you a bizarre example of just that, right in my own house.
My families, some came from New England, but my mother's family came from Minneapolis, by way of New England and other places, some of them.
My, what is it, great, great uncle was named George Duvall, who was the author of 40 Years a Gambler on the Mississippi, a life as a riverboat gambler.
And my grandmother even had some oral tradition about that man, I'd ask.
She'd poo-poo him because, you know, it isn't nice to be a gambler, and you don't want to be a gambler, and it's not a thing to be, and this is embarrassing to the family, and he'd come home and he'd tell all these lies and tall tales about what he did, and one time he'd have a whole bunch of diamonds, and another time he'd have nothing, and that man was really kind of a bum, et cetera, et cetera.
All right.
Well, he published a book.
The book was reprinted.
I have a ratty copy of the original.
I mean, really ratty, no covers.
all broken up, but it's there, and a copy of the reprint.
That's chapter one.
Chapter two is we have an alum who is class of 67.
He's a writer.
His name is Dennis Brown.
He writes for screenplays, but he's also interested in the Mississippi, so he came out to see me.
And we were talking about this and that, and he was telling me that he's now going off to ride on one of the riverboats, and that's nice, so
We thought about that.
And then Dennis said, he was talking about this.
I said, Dennis, did you ever hear of the gambler George Duvall?
He said, oh, yes, he's very famous.
He's the only one of those guys ever who wrote an account of his life.
So it's a very important book.
He said, you know, but there's one thing about him.
Nobody's ever found a picture of him.
I said, you're kidding.
He said, yeah.
I mean, for all of this, there's a, you know, there's a woodcut of it.
But you'd think living even into the 20th century, there'd be a photograph.
What do you think?
That there'd be two.
Right.
You know, the pictures would have survived.
Nick, I have two from my grandmother and a picture of his wife that he said no one has, you know, we've heard he had a wife, but no one's ever seen a picture of her.
I had them myself.
It never occurred to me.
These were, you know, even in slightest interest.
They're just family pictures.
Scott Turrell of this city, who I went to be, a friend of mine, I know him, who's worked.
I told him about, you know, how you can get a degree in English literature from Georgetown University without ever having to study Shakespeare.
You've heard of this.
Scott told me, I can do you one better than that.
I was at a dinner.
at Amherst College with the president, Tom Garrity, when he was informed that they had just graduated a summa cum laude in English from Amherst College, and the individual had never taken a course in Shakespeare, Milton, Chaucer, and Spencer at Garrity's job practice, and he did that.
Do you have any kind of a response?
I have a two-level response on that.
That certainly it's important
that such things be there and that kids be able to take them.
But I went through a debate once at Connecticut College on whether or not the philosophy department could drop its course on Plato.
Plato and Aristotle, I think it was.
Now, this was a rather strange time.
I don't know if they do this anymore.
Late 70s or early 80s.
It was not the 60s and early 70s.
Yeah, yeah, and they said kids aren't taking this course.
It was not at that point mandatory, and we just don't have the enrollment.
Is it okay if we drop it?
And the faculty, the only time I can remember we ever did this, voted no, the philosophy department may not drop the course.
which the faculty had the power to say, well, okay, they continued to offer it, and two or three or four kids, five kids would take it.
So honor was served, but basically there were three kids who took Plato and Aristotle, and a foreigner that didn't.
Yeah, but let me ask, let me take it to the next level.
Would you, as a college president, allow a degree in philosophy to a student who had not studied Aristotle or Plato?
probably wouldn't because Aristotle and Plato are incorporated in virtually every course we teach.
So that the kid who never had a course in Milton or Shakespeare certainly had some acquaintance with Shakespeare one way or another, whether the course was taught Shakespeare, comedy, Shakespeare, you know.
But then again, you've got to ask this.
Let's just listen to your discourse tonight.
You talked about Elizabeth Bishop.
You talked about Our Lady of Amherst there, Emily Dickinson.
There was a time these people weren't in the curriculum at all.
Are these worthy of putting in the curriculum?
I think the canon is a constantly evolving way of the king.
That's what's so interesting about academic history.
I've got a 1912, 1910 or 12 Hamilton catalog.
And let me tell you, these boys took the gloves off.
It is the most vigorous, wonderful catalog.
It says, Hamilton does not offer a cafeteria program like so many other colleges in America.
Hamilton will maintain its standards to the end of time.
And, I mean, you've just got to say, god damn, they're not going to let those standards fall through Hamilton.
But my point is, you call it degree literature, but don't, you call it English literature.
Well, there's political correctness, but there was a different kind before.
Don't forget that.
Until
About, I would say, 1970, it was considered untoward to teach any novels after 1914.
That is simply, you know, modern trash that kids will read as amusement.
Nobody read Joyce when I went to Bates, that I know of.
One of the reasons Yale emerged is that Harvard wasn't teaching the right stuff, and you keep going that way.
I can't defend ignoring
the great central canon around which things work.
And that's an interesting and political correct question itself.
Many people will say there is no canon at all.
You know, in past pains, you keep talking about all these ancient books.
and there's no canon, you've just got to get with a modern world and read that.
And here are the 12 books that will explain that to you if you don't know it.
Now think about that.
There's no canon, but here are the 12 standard books that, I mean, there's just a substitution of one list for another.
That's why the Chevalier Saint-Georges is so important.
Because what some places would like to do is say to the answer to that question is yes.
Because it has excluded women.
It has excluded blacks.
It has excluded any group I want to know.
It's an interesting question to go to Jamaica.
Does the 18th century exist?
Is that like talking about the Dark Ages?
Is this part of Jamaican history?
Here's something I'm thinking about doing.
If I could play better, and maybe even if I can't,
I love antiquarian stuff.
I have a music manuscript.
I don't know if I told you this, that it was arguably the oldest known American secular music that I just picked up in Goodspeed one day, 1744.
That was 10 bucks, right?
No, 250.
Big spending.
It's a manuscript of a harpsichord teacher who later went to Williamsburg, Peter Powell.
His teacher was Johann Pachelbel's son.
Pachelbel was a great contemporary of J.S.
Bach.
One of his sons was in this country, was organist in Charleston, died in 1750.
Just before I went to Jamaica, I realized, again, just dumb luck to find this, Pachelbel's other kid,
played a concert in Kingston, Jamaica, 1728.
Wow.
I mean, why should I find this two days before I go to Kingston?
So I go down there, and I say, do you know anything about this?
Nope, never heard of it.
I'm concerned that you have to go home.
Yeah.
Well, the whole point is that here, you see, I could go down there, and with some friends, we could play the Chevalier Saint-Georges.
You're down where?
Jamaica?
Yeah.
We could play Chevalier Saint-Georges.
we could play Ignacio Sanchez and say, look, the 18th century is not alien territory if you're of African descent, because they aren't well known, because you haven't been paying attention to them, but there are some spectacular people taking part in that tradition right then when it happened.
I sense that you really don't have a... this whole thing about the Western canon and stuff like that.
It's a tough question, isn't it?
Well, it is and it isn't, because I'm a believer in Asia, too.
Because you really didn't answer the question directly.
No, no, and you won't get that from me.
I'm not going to say every kid has to take Shakespeare.
Well, but if you're an English major, that was the context of the question.
English literature.
You're purporting to be a nation.
I'm not going to tell the professors of English you've got to read Shakespeare rather than Milton, and Milton rather than Congreve, and Congreve rather than Dryden.
That's their department.
Pick that stuff out.
I just brought, over the weekend, a folio.
heroic poem on the last judgment in the manner of milton 1714 i started reading one page and i said i can see why this is a pristine copy but that's it's in each year in each era the literature we read is what appeals to us
Shakespeare sometimes is a tough go to me.
Sometimes I listen to it and it does fall trippingly on the ear.
Other times I wonder, this is a little bit rough go.
A lot of 18th century theater doesn't appeal to a lot of people.
But on the other hand, J.S.
Bach was completely forgotten.
I don't think he was published at all in England.
and wasn't revived until the Mendelssohn efforts in the 1900s.
He just didn't fit the taste of the times.
And what's taste and what's truth is always in the balance every academic generation.
Good question.